Draft changelog for `v2.8.0` (#3124)
ESMValGroup/ESMValTool: doc/sphinx/source/changelog.rst

-  Move flake8 check to a step separate from installation on CircleCI (`#3105 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3105>`__) `Bouwe Andela <https://github.com/bouweandela>`__

Installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Unpin cf-units (`#2930 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2930>`__) `Bouwe Andela <https://github.com/bouweandela>`__
-  Pin shapely<2.0.0 for linux64 (`#2970 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2970>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__
-   Set the version number on the development branches to one minor version more than the last release  (`#2964 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2964>`__) `Bouwe Andela <https://github.com/bouweandela>`__
-  Add `packaging` as direct dependency to ESMValTool (`#3099 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3099>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__
-  Conda environment files for esmvalcore=2.8.0rc2 (`#3120 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3120>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__

Improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> -  Merge release branch `release_270stable` in main so we pick up unsquashed commits and set the correct version 2.7.0 for main (and up version in CITATION.cff) (`#2896 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2896>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__

Reviewer: this is really not for Improvements :laughing: It's more for maintenance, not sure what label to assign it - maybe we should create a maintenance label - for now I'd move it to Installation (up one)

-  Make results of recipes schlund20jgr_*.yml deterministic (`#2900 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2900>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
-  Recipe_gier2020bg.yml: add sorting to SA barplot (`#2905 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2905>`__) `Bettina Gier <https://github.com/bettina-gier>`__
-  Add the outline of a climatological tropopause to the zonalmean_profile plots (`#2947 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2947>`__) `FranziskaWinterstein <https://github.com/FranziskaWinterstein>`__
-  Update data finder imports (`#2958 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2958>`__) `Bouwe Andela <https://github.com/bouweandela>`__
-  Add support for the upcoming ESMValCore v2.8 release to the recipe filler tool (`#2995 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2995>`__) `Bouwe Andela <https://github.com/bouweandela>`__
-  Read config-user.yml using `esmvalcore.config` module (`#2736 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2736>`__) `Bouwe Andela <https://github.com/bouweandela>`__

> -  Recreate conda lock file to harpoon esmvalcore=2.8.0rc1 (`#3108 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3108>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__

Reviewer: this is again for testing/maintenance - I'd put it in Testing this one

-  Fix read_cmor in NCL utilities (`#3007 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3007>`__) `Axel Lauer <https://github.com/axel-lauer>`__
-  Removed usages of deprecated features that cause diagnostic crashes (`#3009 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3009>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
-  Replace removed `matplotlib.pyplot.savefig` option `additional_artists` (`#3075 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3075>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
-  Added missing comma to `sommer17joss.bibtex` (`#3078 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3078>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
-  Fix call of output_type in `aux_plotting.ncl` (`#3083 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3083>`__) `Lisa Bock <https://github.com/LisaBock>`__
-  Remove colorbar from `bbox_extra_artists` (`#3087 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3087>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
-  Fix `MPI-ESM1-2-HR` entries in `recipe_tebaldi21esd` (`#3093 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3093>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__

> -  Fix `perfmetric`s v2.8.0 (`#3098 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3098>`__) `Axel Lauer <https://github.com/axel-lauer>`__

Reviewer: I should have caught this at PR stage - do you mind adding a couple more bits to the title? Otherwise it sounds too vague/terse/unappealing :grin:

-  Fix `recipe_sea_surface_salinity` for v2.8 (`#3102 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3102>`__) `sloosvel <https://github.com/sloosvel>`__

> -  Fix the ESACCI-LST CMORizer (`#3104 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3104>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__

Reviewer: ugh really not sexy titles for these - I thought it was only one (up there) - there are 3-4 - up to you if you want to add more verbosity

-  Update script to draft release notes (`#3070 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3070>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__
-  Synchronize documentation table of contents with ESMValCore (`#3073 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3073>`__) `Bouwe Andela <https://github.com/bouweandela>`__
-  Update environment handling in release documentation (`#3096 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3096>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__
-  Clarify use (or not) of Jasmin climatology files by soil moisture & permafrost recipes (`#3103 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3103>`__) `Alistair Sellar <https://github.com/alistairsellar>`__
-  Add link to recipe portal in the gallery page (`#3113 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3113>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__
-  Improve stratosphere documentation (`#3114 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3114>`__) `Alistair Sellar <https://github.com/alistairsellar>`__

> -  Re-pin sphinx to latest (6.1.3) and add nbsphinx to the environment (`#3118 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3118>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__

Reviewer: this one is defo more Installation than documentation - my bad for adding Installation as the second label

-  Update Python example recipe (`#3119 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3119>`__) `Bouwe Andela <https://github.com/bouweandela>`__
-  Updated figure settings to account for newer matplotlib version (`#3133 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3133>`__) `katjaweigel <https://github.com/katjaweigel>`__

Observational and re-analysis dataset support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Added CMORizer for MOBO-DIC_MPIM (dissic) (`#2909 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2909>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
-  Added CMORizer for Landschützer2020 (spco2) (`#2908 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2908>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
-  Added CMORizer for OceanSODA-ETHZ (areacello, co3os, dissicos, fgco2, phos, spco2, talkos) (`#2915 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2915>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
-  Add JRA-25 cmorizer (`#2927 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2927>`__) `Lisa Bock <https://github.com/LisaBock>`__

> -  Extension of ERA-Interim CMORizer (`#2923 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2923>`__) `Axel Lauer <https://github.com/axel-lauer>`__

Reviewer: Extension of ERA-Interim CMORizer: 8 more variables added (Axel's not very verboze when it comes to PR titles haha)

=========

.. _changelog-v2-8-0:

v2.8.0
------

Highlights
~~~~~~~~~~

-  This release has seen the inclusion of the code for figures 3.9, 3.19,
   3.42 and 3.43 of the IPCC AR6 WG1 report.
   See :ref:`recipe documentation <recipes_ipccwg1ar6ch3>` about added recipes.
-  A new set of recipes and diagnostics has been included to evaluate cloud
   climatologies from CMIP models as used in `Lauer et al. (2023), J. Climate
   <https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-22-0181.1>`__.
   See :ref:`recipe documentation <recipes_clouds>` about added recipes.
-  We have also included a set of recipes for extreme events, regional and impact 
   evaluation as used in `Weigel et al. (2021), J. Climate
   <https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-14-3159-2021>`__ and in IPCC AR5.
   See :ref:`recipe documentation <recipes_ipccwg1ar5ch9>` about added recipes.

> Please also note the highlights from the corresponding ESMValCore release :ref:`here<esmvalcore:changelog-v2-8-0>`.
> Thanks to that ESMValTool has gained the following features:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Highlights from ESMValCore v2.8.0 :ref:`here<esmvalcore:changelog-v2-8-0>`:
```

- ESMValCore now supports wildcards in recipes and offers improved support
  for ancillary variables and dataset versioning.
- Support for CORDEX datasets in a rotated pole coordinate system has been added.
- Native :ref:`ICON <esmvalcore:read_icon>` output is now made UGRID-compliant
  on-the-fly.
- The Python API has been extended with the addition of three modules:
  :mod:`esmvalcore.config`, :mod:`esmvalcore.dataset`, and
  :mod:`esmvalcore.local`
- The preprocessor :func:`~esmvalcore.preprocessor.multi_model_statistics`
  has been extended to support more use-cases.

This release includes:

Backwards incompatible changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Please read the descriptions of the linked pull requests for detailed upgrade instructions.

> -  Remove deprecated features scheduled for removal in v2.8.0 or earlier

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  Deprecated features scheduled for removal in v2.8.0 or earlier have now been removed
```

   ``var_name`` instead).
   Removed `write_netcdf` and `write_plots` from `recipe_filer.py`.
-  No files from the ``native6`` project will be found if a non-existent version
   of a dataset is specified (`#3041 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3041>`_)
   `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__.
   The tool now searches for exact ``version`` of ``native6`` datasets.
   Therefore, it is necessary to make sure that the version number in the
   directory tree matches with the version number in the recipe to find the files.
-  The conversion of precipitation units from monitoring diagnostic is now done
   at the preprocessor stage
   (`#3049 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3049>`_)
   `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__.
   To use the unit conversion for precipitation in the new version of this
   diagnostic, add it as a preprocessor for the precipitation dataset to the
   recipe.

Bug fixes
~~~~~~~~~

-  Fix for provenance records from `seaice_tsline.ncl` (`#2938 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2938>`__) `Axel Lauer <https://github.com/axel-lauer>`__

> -  Fix in `validation.py` for resolving datasets with identical names by using distinct alias (`#2955 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2955>`__) `FranziskaWinterstein <https://github.com/FranziskaWinterstein>`__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  Fix in `validation.py` for resolving datasets with identical names by using distinct aliases (`#2955 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2955>`__) `FranziskaWinterstein <https://github.com/FranziskaWinterstein>`__
```

-  Replace deprecated function `cm.register_cmap` with `mpl.colormaps.register` for `recipe_ arctic_ocean` (`#3112 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3112>`__) `Tomas Torsvik <https://github.com/TomasTorsvik>`__
-  Fix `recipe_extract_shape.yml` (lacking caption for provenance) (`#3126 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3126>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__

Community
~~~~~~~~~

-  Update documentation on pre-installed versions on HPC clusters (`#2934 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2934>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__

Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Remove radiation recipes that have been superseded by :ref:`recipe_radiation_budget <recipes_radiation_budget>` along with associated diagnostic scripts (`#3115 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3115>`_) `Alistair Sellar <https://github.com/alistairsellar>`__

Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Backward compatibility policy (`#2879 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2879>`__) `Alistair Sellar <https://github.com/alistairsellar>`__

> -  Suppress installing and reinstalling deps with pip at readthedocs builds (`#2913 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2913>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  Suppress installing and reinstalling dependencies with pip during readthedocs builds (`#2913 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2913>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__
```

-  Clarify use (or not) of Jasmin climatology files by soil moisture & permafrost recipes (`#3103 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3103>`__) `Alistair Sellar <https://github.com/alistairsellar>`__
-  Add link to recipe portal in the gallery page (`#3113 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3113>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__
-  Improve stratosphere documentation (`#3114 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3114>`__) `Alistair Sellar <https://github.com/alistairsellar>`__
-  Added note to documentation that not all datasets used in `schlund20jgr` recipes are available on ESGF (`#3121 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3121>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
-  Documenting broken recipes after recipe testing for releases (`#3129 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3129>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__
-  Increase ESMValTool version to 2.8.0 and update release schedule (`#3136 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3136>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__

Diagnostics
~~~~~~~~~~~

> -  Cloud diagnostics for Lauer et al. (2022) (`#2750 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2750>`__) `Axel Lauer <https://github.com/axel-lauer>`__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  Cloud diagnostics for Lauer et al. (2023) (`#2750 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2750>`__) `Axel Lauer <https://github.com/axel-lauer>`__
```

-  Added CMORizer for MOBO-DIC_MPIM (dissic) (`#2909 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2909>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
-  Added CMORizer for OceanSODA-ETHZ (areacello, co3os, dissicos, fgco2, phos, spco2, talkos) (`#2915 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2915>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
-  Extension of ERA-Interim CMORizer (cl, cli, clw, lwp, rlut, rlutcs, rsut, rsutcs) (`#2923 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2923>`__) `Axel Lauer <https://github.com/axel-lauer>`__
-  Add JRA-25 cmorizer (clt, hus, prw, rlut, rlutcs, rsut, rsutcs) (`#2927 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2927>`__) `Lisa Bock <https://github.com/LisaBock>`__
-  New CMORizers for datasets from the NCEP family (NCEP-DOE-R2, NCEP-NCAR-R1, NOAA-CIRES-20CR) (`#2931 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2931>`__) `Birgit Hassler <https://github.com/hb326>`__
-  Updates to the recipes that use the NCEP reanalysis dataset (`#2932 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2932>`__) `Birgit Hassler <https://github.com/hb326>`__

> -  Merra2 cmorizer convert vertical level coordinate units from hPa to Pa (`#3003 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3003>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  MERRA2 cmorizer convert vertical level coordinate units from hPa to Pa (`#3003 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3003>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__
```

> -  Merra2 cmorizer set UNLIMITED time coordinate (`#3006 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3006>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  MERRA2 cmorizer set UNLIMITED time coordinate (`#3006 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3006>`__) `Valeriu Predoi <https://github.com/valeriupredoi>`__
```

> -  Added CMORizers for TCOM-CH4 (ch4) and TCOM-N2O (n2o) (`#3014 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3014>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  Added CMORizers for TCOM-CH4 (CH4) and TCOM-N2O (N2O) (`#3014 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3014>`__) `Manuel Schlund <https://github.com/schlunma>`__
```

> -  Update HadISST cmorizer with recent years (`#3027 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3027>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  Update HadISST cmorizer to include recent years (`#3027 <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/3027>`__) `Rémi Kazeroni <https://github.com/remi-kazeroni>`__
```
